1213FN and open the public hearing on HB 1661FN and recognize the prime sponsor representative
Gearhart. There he is. And we need a pin card representative. You've got one. Okay. Good. All set. Sure. Thank you. Sure.
Is that Mr. Baldwin or representative Gearhart? Representative Gearhart is you're talking about John Baldwin senior. Yeah. Okay. Great. Thank you.
Good afternoon committee. I'm being joined with John Baldwin. I'm Jason Gerhard Northfield Franklin Merrimack 25.
John Baldwin is a knowledgeable individual on this bill. He helped write most of it. This is a relative to immunization reporting requirements. And this bill requires death certificates to record certain information regarding immunizations received by the descendant.
The bill also established a certain reporting requirements for the Department of Health and Human Services regarding death records and immunizations.
I'd like to hand it off to John for the time being and we'll just switch back and forth. But he has a handout that was passed around that if you'd like to address and take it on. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thanks for having me guys. Appreciate being here. So this bill is unique in the entire country. What it's doing is allowing the people access to the data that belongs to the people, which is the health of the state.
So I'm just going to start going through the handout a little bit because it'll it'll lend some structure to how you perceive the data.
There was an estimate of $160,000 that was done by New Hampshire with regard to this bill. It doesn't seem as though they looked at the other column where it would save probably more than a million dollars a year for the state.
Can't really talk about that in a short time here. So anybody is welcome to contact me and I can go through any financial analysis and also point out the flaws in the 160 K.
So HB 1661 would be a net budget reduction for the Department of Public Health. It would save lives. That's the most important thing. Save New Hampshire lives and provide a better functioning Department of Public Health and keep them on mission, which is to for the health and the safety of New Hampshire citizens.
Without the bill, the truth remains hidden from the people.
Public confidence in DPH will wane as more people die, which which has been happening.
And people prescribed medicines that were recommended by the government and I don't mean New Hampshire, not necessarily people who rely on the CDC and FDA for what is safe and effective.
They've been let down. Many have been let down. So let's talk about one specific cause. It's it's the code is D 68, but these are other clotting defects.
What you have here on this page, these are New Hampshire residents who died in Massachusetts. I have all the Massachusetts death records.
It would be illegal for me to have New Hampshire records of the same type, but I have these legally from Massachusetts and I've kept this pair of us, all other things being equal.
You see the bar of 2021 being very high when it comes to cloth defects.
And one gentleman Martin from Summersworth, he was 47 years old, died with multi organ failure stroke hyper coagulability. That's hyper clotting.
All of a sudden the guy started hyper clotting all in days. He did not have a history of this.
Cardiac amyloidosis, which is a known condition from COVID gene therapy injections. It's known to happen.
So I don't know when he got his vaccine. This could be correlated and we don't have to let private information out.
What this bill does is it makes sure that the public knows the correlation of the immunizations to the health outcomes, which the people should should know and have a right to know.
With anemia's there is thromasitopenia and ability to clot their leukemia, neutropenia. The example here is febrile neutropenia in hours.
Acute myeloid leukemia AML. That's also a signal that's been growing very strong since COVID immunizations.
And you see that 21 and 22 are also very high for New Hampshire residents who died in Massachusetts hospitals, only again, 21 and 22.
This is sudden kidney failure. It's also called acute renal failure.
This is probably the biggest epidemic of single deaths since 1918-19 and nobody's talking about it. The CDC knows this. They have to know this.
100,000 excess Americans died involving acute renal failure in 21 and 22 and very many in 2023.
And the exact time that it started happening was two weeks after November 2nd, which is CMS.gov, where the NCTAP, which is the incentive, 20% of the entire hospital bill,
gets paid from the federal government, they get a bonus. The hospitals get a bonus. The doctors get a bonus for using remdesivir, barisitinib, and other medicines.
That's a big one. So Joseph was 30 years old, multi-system organ failure in nine days, pneumonia, flu, staphylococcus, aureus, and sudden kidney failure. He was from Franklin, New Hampshire.
Clots in the brain that caused strokes. You see that 2022 is almost double. Actually, it's almost triple some of the other years.
Jeffrey was 53 years old, died from a stroke in days, hypercoagulable in months. Again, very hyper clotting.
Intraventricular hemorrhage. And then Elaine was 61 years old. She died from a cerebral herniation, another kind of stroke, a multifocal cerebral infarcts, and a bonus of an aortic dissection, or aorta blue apart.
Those are also very high since the vaccine, if you want to call it a vaccine.
And lastly, for these, this set is clots in lungs. In Massachusetts, there's more than 500 excess pulmonary embolism deaths in 21 and 22 alone, 500.
And I've correlated many of them with knowledge of their vaccination dates. Now, in New Hampshire, you see that 2021 is very high.
Lindsay was only 27 years old from new to New Hampshire, died August 4th, pulmonary thromboembolie, and deep vein thrombosis. Those are usually in the calf, and they call it throwing a clock, right?
It breaks off, it travels to your lung, and then you can die, and she did. I don't know her vaccination date, but this bill would force that analysis to be done and that analysis is not being done by any government at this time.
That's why it's, it's, you know, purposeful in action, omission of conduct where there's a legal duty to act, and they should be doing this.
So this public oversight in this bill would be the best in the nation.
Also, Jeffrey was 30 years old from Epping, New Hampshire, cardiogenic shock.
It says massive pulmonary embolism in six hours.
He also had brain cancer in eight months, another signal known from the vaccine.
Amy was 40 years old, disseminated in travascular coagulation, all through her body, coagulating class, all through her body, and a pulmonary embolism in DVT.
Now, I do write on, I write a sub stack, probably two or three times a month, so I'm a journalist.
As a journalist and a member of the press, people approach me with information from official sources, and I won't divulge it if I don't think it's real.
But if I check it out, yeah, I will.
So I'm going to share some here today.
This information regarding the health of the people of New Hampshire should not have to have been acquired as I've done.
The data belongs to the people, not the government. The government is of the people.
There are some facts people would have known if Bill 1661 was in place years ago.
At least 87 people, when I say at least, it's because the data have is only a subset of people from New Hampshire, a small subset.
87 people died in New Hampshire within three days of COVID immunization.
At least 50 died within two days of immunization, New Hampshire.
24 died on the day of or the day after immunization.
The next 11 people died on the same day, New Hampshire of immunization.
Rodney Lucas was 62.
Barbara Jenkins, 68, Amy Thomas, 72.
Daniel Cheney was 76.
Ann Kasich, 77.
Louise Fontaine, 81, Marguerite, Temla, 83, Roger Pinchard, 83, Catherine Downs, 84, Sheila Green, 85.
Could you just give the ages and not the names since you have last names there for privacy?
Okay.
Sorry.
I finished actually.
And that is, that is the problem in that.
Do we want to keep secret from the people?
Things that are killing the people.
I mean, the point is the health and safety of the public. And so, you know, they all died on the same day of immunization.
And I'll skip the last name for the, the others.
So, Anna Tucker was 26 years old.
Anna died one day after immunization.
Herobituary says, passed away peacefully in her sleep.
The first name is going to give this guy away.
Stoshu, it's a unique name.
35 years old died on Christmas Eve, two days after immunization unexpectedly.
Robert died March 19, 2022, four days after immunization of matching various report,
22, 01, 082 report, mentions cardiomyopathy because they gave an immunization to a guy with a heart transplant in 2017.
Why would you give somebody a medicine for a heart?
He had a heart transplant.
He also had a bone marrow transplant in 2021.
And if you remember I mentioned AML earlier, he also had acute myeloblastic leukemia.
Now I know from the Massachusetts data and the Minnesota data, I have a million death certificates, unredacted.
Probably the only one on the world outside government.
And if you haven't seen my analyses, I can send you a copy.
I have two books coming out within three weeks.
So, because the government refuses to look at this data and hides the data from the people,
very few of us know that AML is common from this vaccine.
So is a lymphoma.
And all the blood causes on the trifold that I went through a moment ago.
All pretty common from the COVID vaccines.
It's not down party lines, you shouldn't have an orthodoxy one way or the other.
I don't care.
The reason I looked into this is because I lost my son and I wasn't doing anything else and I'm depressed.
And so I just want to save kids.
The adults can take it because do your homework.
If you haven't looked into what this actually is and the defects in manufacturing that Kevin McCurnan found.
And if you don't know what I'm talking about, you should really look into that.
So I don't know how many lawyers are here, but manufacturing defect is a strict liability standard.
Very easy to determine.
They didn't meet their own specifications and they shipped the product anyway.
So the product has DNA contamination in the form of plasmids.
And I'm not a scientist, so I won't go into that in detail.
But the point is they're shipping contaminated product to the public.
And nobody's saying anything.
The government's just saying take it, take it.
So this bill, 1661, I'm just going to close by saying it just gives transparency to the people.
It doesn't matter what side you're on.
If you believe vaccines are safe and effective, great.
This will prove it.
It'll prove them safe and effective or it'll prove them not safe and effective.
And when I say them, some of them are going to be good.
Some of them are going to be bad because it also has to do with all medicaments, not just vaccines.
So if if remdesivir is good or bad, we'll find out.
If it's a combination of why aren't they looking at remdesivir and combination with Bank of Mison?
That's that's very strong antibiotic given kind of in the end as people go septic.
But I guess I'll just thank you very much for your time.
I hope this impressed something on you.
And if you have any questions, please, please ask me because this is so important.
Representative Gerhard, do you have any thing to add or are you just.
I was just going off at the right. No, I would just.
I was hoping John would talk briefly about the last part, the audits.
I think that's key.
Transparency is the mission here because there's been.
I don't know what the right word would be, but there's been a drop in people getting.
Vaccinations because of fear and concern and so forth.
So the best way to bring back trust is to show the truth and this.
Is part of it. So if you want to speak briefly about that, just explain.
Yeah, sure.
Kind of nature of it.
The section one.
It requires that the vaccine dates immunization any immunizations given within the last two years prior to dying be put on the death certificate.
It's a nominal less than five minute thing that any medical examiner doctor can do.
The analysis of the hundred sixty thousand dollars was was grossly exaggerated because all you really have to do is look for the number of unique names.
In the death certificate database in New Hampshire and only those people would have to be trained.
The only skip to the last.
It also forces the Department of Public Health to do quarterly reports, which would take maybe.
I don't know, fifteen minutes to thirty minutes.
Now when they just put out a quarterly report, it's just you write some scripts and you correlate to databases, the immunization database and the death certificate or Medicare if you want to get complicated.
The last one, though, is really interesting. I like it. Of course, I wrote it.
But it allows the people to come in the state offices and audit the data, not just everybody, but people have to submit reports and of those reports for a drawn by lottery.
And the people doing the work cannot have been in pharma industry, any eco pharma ecosystem company or government.
So it allows for entities, it could be for groups or for individuals or mix to come in and look at the data under NDA.
The data exists for a reason.
It's to be studied and the studying of that data would provide invaluable information to the people with regard to public health.
The reason the public health department exists is for the safety of the public and yet they're not doing anything with it. Nobody is.
So the last part is pretty key.
It allows the people to have access to the data with reports and no one's names.
All privacy laws are adhered to.
There's absolutely no problem.
The only reason to be against this is if somebody's trying to hide something and people on both sides should be for this.
Right. Thank you.
President Obama, you had a question.
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you for taking my question. So.
One clarification. I never got a bonus for taking for prescribing remdesivir. So I missed out on something.
But my concern is.
And my question will follow is.
I was a hospice medical director for about 30 years. So I filled out a lot of debt certificates and I rarely.
Would have had the information on vaccinations because a lot of the times of patient will have shown up at our.
Hospital.
I won't have the records for that and obtaining them would be very difficult.
And I and I still would probably not know, for example, if they got a.
COVID vaccination at a pharmacy, it wouldn't be there. So it would be very hard to collect this data. I wonder if you.
Did any research on that and how that might be made easier because it would be really, I mean, it would, it would take me hours to find that.
Yeah. So in fact, in that analysis of the $160,000, what they're doing is they're talking about how long it would take to train.
Doctors to have access to the new Hampshire immunization information system, which exists.
And that's a registry of all the vaccinations people have gotten if they didn't want it.
There is a box you can check for it to be redacted. And in the case where it's not there, it's not there, but in the case where it is there, it would require a doctor to look it up and that that would be like a less than a five minute thing.
You just go into the NIH, I, I, S. You log in and you'd probably already be logged in if you're doing death certificates. If you're a medical examiner, but if it's a doctor, you're probably talking, you know, if somebody dies in the in the presence of a doctor attending.
That's when a doctor fills out the death certificate. And in that case, it depends. You know, if they work in a care home, they're going to be doing a lot of them.
If they're just, you know, regular family practice and somebody dies, it's probably like once a year, right? So, you know, it might take them 10 minutes instead of five minutes. It's really no big deal.
It's pretty easy to do.
Representative King and then Representative Palazoff.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for taking questions. I'm a little confused.
What is it about Massachusetts that is different than New Hampshire? You've got some case individuals here and their cause of death.
I guess they put that on their vital, their vital records. They put that on their death certificate. Does New Hampshire not do that? Does New Hampshire not put a cause of death or New Hampshire as a state law that doesn't allow me to have those records.
It's privacy. They're certain. So it's governed by state law. It's not a privacy and death HIPAA violation. That's federal law. And there's the HIPAA doesn't apply to dead people. So each state has privacy.
And many of the states have 50 years. Some have 70 years privacy and death where they wouldn't allow me to have a database of full database of all the decedents.
Massachusetts apparently does allow me to have it in Minnesota as well. And Vermont, we have also, but Vermont does not have the ICD 10 codes from the CDC.
So it's a little different. Follow up. Follow up. So it's not on their death certificates, but the information is available or it is on their death certificates.
New Hampshire has the same death certificates as everybody else. There's part one and part two. Part one has cause ABCD. Part two has conditions contributing.
The causes are in part one and you should not have anything on there that's not causal in the causal chain of events that cause death. However, many of them do it wrong.
Very large number of doctors, no offense, fill out the death certificates improperly. Medical examiners do a better job. It's supposed to be in a reverse time order where cause A is the immediate cause.
And the last one listed in ABC or D, whether it sometimes is only one filled out A, sometimes it goes to D, but the last one is supposed to be the underlying cause of death or root cause, which is the thing that started the causal chain of events that caused the death.
But a lot of them do it in reverse time order backwards. So I hope I answered your question.
Yes, I have one more follow up. Okay.
Would it would it not be beneficial for us to more or less copy what Massachusetts does and at least allowing that information to be accessible like you currently have with Massachusetts.
I mean, that would be good, but that's only the death certificate database. If I were, if I had the Massachusetts data and access to the immunization information registry system, they call it as the MIIS, you have the NHIS in Indiana.
They call it chirp in California. It's cares. It's different acronyms, but they're all the same thing.
Anybody who does that, I will end the entire debate in a week.
Ron DeSantis and Joe Latipo have a proposal for me from a year and a half ago and a year ago, and I told him the invitation is open.
He's been told by six very well known international people, just have him come in for a week or two.
You know, just give me access. All you got to do is correlate the two databases and debate ends.
I'll find over 10,000 people in Florida pretty easily.
Thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for taking my question.
I like the idea of transparency and you put here 10 days of close of each fiscal quarter.
So my understanding is some manufacturers, they don't oppose to transparencies.
They only ask for 70 years to be transparent about what's going on.
And my understanding is that New Hampshire is also is not opposed to transparency.
We have DHS visit portal, but it shows mostly data going up to 2019.
So my understanding is that all those deaths and all those spikes like in acute kidney failure and such wouldn't be accessible to public if we are looking only up to 2019.
So my point is like, so it usually takes time.
Sometimes it's for good reason to release data.
So what's a good time?
Like, let's say it's impossible to do it within 10 days.
Like would be like six months be reasonable by one time or five years or 70 years.
Like what's reasonable?
Yeah, I can comment.
So there's there's provisional data that's not been verified.
And that's usually like a year, year and a half, depending on the jurisdiction.
So the federal government, I can't remember that, but it's about six months when they say these deaths, the data that they're providing is provisional saying you can't rely on it.
It's really legal indemnification.
The data is pretty good.
If your public health department is indeed a vigilance, a sentinel standing on the wall looking out for public health, they should be looking at it weekly.
Pathogens come into our society all the time.
I found things in 2018 nobody ever knew about.
There are anomalies in various causes of death.
The system that I've created could potentially, if you put all the data in there and I do all the put all the parameters in, I could tell you, well, 39 years ago, in these two zip codes, there was an increase in B cell lymphocytic leukemia.
Let's go look at their water supply from then.
We have the water reports from then.
Was there too much nickel or cadmium?
This is the type of intelligence that's so easy to do.
The system I've created doesn't exist anywhere in the world and yet the data is available to the government.
I can't answer like a definitive date, but if you have a department of public health whose mission is the health and safety of the public, they should be looking at it weekly.
The reports are rolling in and okay, if it's provisional, that means somebody outside the government looking at it.
It's legal indemnification where you're saying you can't rely on it. We're not responsible if there's a mistake.
All right, that's just semantics.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for all the research that you've done and for coming to share some of your findings.
My first question is around the data that you're looking to get from the IIS.
My question would be just so that we can have good solid data and be able to show which events have no relationship to a vaccination event and to be able to appropriately case match them between those with a vaccination event and those without.
Would you be amenable to having it indicate whether a person has no IIS record because they have not enrolled in the IIS or if they have a record with no vaccination events?
Because those two, it could confound the data if you have somebody who has not chosen to participate in the registry versus those with no vaccine events.
Yeah, absolutely. If they chose not to participate, the record's not there. It's not there. You know, you can't blame.
So if there needs to be wording, I can't remember what the exact wording is. I thought I counted for that because if there's no record, you can't blame a guy for not putting it on the desert.
That's what you're saying, right? Yeah.
And then as my follow up, I think that this idea of these audits are incredibly helpful, but I do know that academia or pharma may also be interested in this in order to improve outcomes.
My question would be that if those four audit roles are not filled with private individuals or both the public.
If opening up those to academia or to sort of pharma companies or anybody who's associated who want to get those data and perhaps improve life would be beneficial.
Yeah, I don't think it needs to be statutorily included. I believe that the Department of Public Health could probably have them just sign a contractor agreement and invite them into look at the data under NDA.
I don't know that what this does is it compels that the work be done for the people, but if you want to add pharma, that would be up to your HHS department.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Other questions, Representative Nagle.
Thank you for taking my question. Mr. Chairman, sorry, it's late. Thank you for taking my question.
I have actually two questions. One has to do with the data that you're collecting that you want reported within such a timeframe.
I mean, one of the things we know in medicine is that association doesn't necessarily imply cause.
And what I'm looking at is the data that you want on a regular basis implies a number of core abilities of vaccine type things like that.
I don't see type of cause of death listed in that data that's being asked for.
Is that something that you would want?
Whoever did the audit of the public health data. I didn't, you know, I would hope that it was the immunization registry all Medicare and Medicaid.
What are they being treated for? So if somebody dies in the same day as vaccination and about half of the ones that I found were actually fentanyl overdoses.
Yeah. Okay. Not, not these, but so would you blame the vaccine for that? I mean, I would because I think it affected their brains to come to suicide, but that's a stretch. Right.
So what you're saying.
Yeah, correlation doesn't equal causation. It's a catchphrase. We all now know it's been drilled out there in the public domain.
But when you see that everybody, and this is how I found this stuff, when Cassidy, a seven year old girl in Massachusetts died, they said she died from COVID.
I was like, no way. And I went and got the half a million dust certificates.
And I found that it does say she died of that, but then I found a bear's record for a seven year old girl, the only girl in that time frame who was vaccinated five days before Cassidy died.
And she reacted in five minutes, vomited for eight to 10 hours.
They gave her a second vaccine a couple weeks later. And that one is the date of January 13, 2022.
She had immediately stomach stomach pain. She had 103 degree fever. Didn't have a bowel movement for three days. And Cassidy Baraka was dead on January 18. Sorry.
I'm not sure if I asked the question. Well, when I'm looking at the data that you want, there's nothing listed in there as cause of death. I mean, you have the age one, the vaccination.
That certificates have cause of death. What's that? That certificates have cause of death. I know, but this is the data that you're asking the state to report.
So in section.
New section to public immunization death reports, you're asking for aggregate data to be sent. I didn't see anywhere where the actual causes of death were going to be included in that data.
It seems to me that would be important.
So the section to the early, there's multiple twos on here. Can you reference page number?
My number 25 on page one, and it goes all the way to line 13 on page two or 10.
Oh, yes. So correct. I didn't have cause there. Just how many people died within one day of vaccination three days, one week, three weeks, 10 weeks, 25 weeks.
And the numbers are what they are just to report them to the public.
I'm just curious. I'm sorry. I want to get to my other question. My other question.
If you think real quick, how does it help you because you understand catcher's parabysmal it means, right? Yeah.
So all of the other things being equal. If there's all of a sudden a spike in a job, then you have to investigate the public would say, darn it, you HHS of New Hampshire, we want you to investigate.
And if you investigate and find they're all pulmonary embolism deaths, well, you have a problem.
You figure out the cause, but if it's fentanyl and some guy fell off a cliff and a school bus got an accident and all of a sudden a bunch of kids died, you'll find out almost immediately and you'll report it to the public.
But those anomalies that occur as a matter of consequence of accidents, people are going to know about, but all of a sudden pulmonary embolism deaths, you're going to know this reports it to the public.
It won't create fear or panic. It'll just create the public to demand of the department.
Tell us what happened, please. That's all.
Can I ask a second question? Second one, you're asked about four.
No, they were follow-ups on the first. This is totally different. Is it a quick one? Yeah, I think so.
In terms of the audit, how you select that, I'm a little concerned about who can apply to be an auditor.
For example, if I wanted to just put in my name into the lottery with no ability to analyze data, am I allowed to be one of the people?
It says in there that they have to have a level of competence, so each proposal that is submitted.
So you submit a proposal, the proposal has to have certain metrics like you're going to do.
I don't like statistical methods with regard to epidemiology, but most of you guys do.
I'm an engineer, I like waveforms and calculus and other stuff.
But if somebody wants to submit a proposal, it has to have a level of competence.
Not anybody can submit one, but you're going to choose the ones that get to be chosen before they get to be chosen from the lottery.
It has to meet certain standards, absolutely.
All the questions. Representative Karshman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being here.
Can you explain why the dates of reporting are contingent upon the dates of presidential and midterm elections?
Yeah, absolutely. Everything is political these days, and that is the greatest amount of avoidance you could possibly have from any political election.
And if the information were to get out to one candidate and not the other, some people would rely upon it better, it would probably not be good.
It wouldn't be fair. So this is the fairest way it could be. They would have a year to know about it before any election. That's why.
Other questions?
I'm saying no other questions. Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you. Thank you.
I really do. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Also signed up to speak, Ryan Tanian and Chowi Chowa from the Department of Health and Human Services.
All right, good afternoon again. I'm Dr. Ryan Tanian Bureau Chief of the Bureau of Infectious Disease Control.
I'm joined by Chowi Chowa, who is our Bureau Chief for the Bureau of Public Health Statistics and Informatics.
And we are here today to speak in opposition to House Bill 1661.
As you know, House Bill 661 if enacted would amend RSA 5c 64 a to require death certificates issued in New Hampshire to include immunization records.
But sourced solely from individuals who are participating in the New Hampshire immunization information system.
The proposed legislation also has specific immunization data elements reporting requirements. And as others have spoken already, some independent audit reports.
So first House Bill 1661 conflicts with RSA 141 C 20 F Roman numeral five, which outlines the allowable use for N HIS information.
Under current law allowable uses include ensuring participants receive recommended immunizations in a timely manner.
Facilitating reminders or notices to participants when due for recommended immunizations and assisting in identifying individuals who may require immunizations during disease outbreaks.
So limitations on the use of participant information were established for the protection of privacy and expanding this use is outlined in House Bill 1661 would not be considered allowable.
House Bill 1661 also conflicts with RSA 141 C 20 F Roman numeral VI subsection F and administrative rule HEP 30704, which is related to authorized access to NHIS.
So authorized access is limited to administering current and former health care providers, the division of public health services with limited access provided to schools, child care agencies and local health departments.
Under the current statute and rule, not all persons who may medically certify a death record, such as the medical examiner are authorized unrestricted access to the NHIS.
So the department believes that broadly granting unrestricted access to any person who can certify a death certificate could be costly and present privacy and security concerns.
If enacted, we would require additional safeguards to protect participant information from potential unauthorized access.
Additionally, House Bill 1606 from the 2022 session amended NHIS to be an opt in and voluntary registry.
So as a result immunizations immunization records of persons who did not voluntarily choose to participate in the registry could not be included as part of their death certificate.
So other immunization records that are not contained in the IIS may be omitted or would be unavailable.
And those include medical records, medical records of persons who have opted out or withdrawn their information from the registry or those who have received immunizations outside of New Hampshire.
So because the legislation does not require other sources of immunization records to be included as part of a death certificate, this legislation is establishing a bias standard for NHIS participants when compared to non participants of the registry.
So functionally information in the IIS may be incomplete or potentially incompatible to align with death certificates processed by the Division of Vital Records Administration.
Data in the NHIS would be considered incomplete for the purpose of vital record standards as it may be self reported.
It could and also be changed by the participant. So unlike for vital records NHIS does not require the use of a participant's legal name permanent address or contain other identifiers such as a driver's license or social security number.
So the department is concerned that the information between the two systems could not correspond to the exact death certificate placing a burden and liability on the person certifying the death certificate.
And then lastly the department we use a robust contract and procurement process to facilitate audits, selecting an auditor through a random lottery would bypass well established competitively bid and thorough vetting process.
So the department uses a minimum necessary approach when granting access to data sets containing personally identifiable information or information technology platforms.
And we believe that house bill 161 would weaken measures currently in place to protect and maintain the integrity of these data and patient information.
And this language does not set forth clear standards certifications or qualifications of the persons or organizations conducting such audits.
So in summary, the department is opposed to house bill 161 due to the data limitations potential and compatibilities of the data sets as it relates to death certificates.
And we believe that there's also a undue burden placed on the persons who are medically certifying the certificates and we would be happy to answer any questions.
Thank you. Representative Weber.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you very much for taking my question.
I just had a question on your written testimony. Was that submitted through the system or was it because I haven't seen it and maybe I just missed it because I wasn't here at the very beginning.
Thank you for the question. It was submitted.
Could you very kindly in the future also submit it in print copy for those of us who keep our records in print.
It would be really helpful and I didn't catch any of those citations and I'm the person who likes citations. So that would be helpful.
Absolutely. Thank you.
And there have been issues with the submission system in the past.
Representative Missouri. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for taking my questions. My question. I might have one more.
Is DHHS as alarmed as a lot of many other people regarding the amount of sudden deaths, turbo cancers, etc.
That have been happening ever since the COVID vaccine has been released.
Is that on your radar? Are you alarmed at all by it? Is it anything you're going to be looking into or think you should be?
Thank you for the question. So, DHHS, where we are specifically in the Division of Public Health Services.
We, when we look at depth data, it is based on what is reported through the vital record system and the death certificates.
We wouldn't necessarily look at anything beyond that unless there was a concern.
And as far as deaths reported related to vaccines that is reported through the VAERS vaccine adverse event reporting system,
which can can be done by medical professionals, but it can also be done by anyone and it's also self reported.
Yep. So, um, the amount of sudden deaths and also the ages of the people as to where this is happening that you're saying that this isn't hasn't just spiked an alarm that.
Hey, maybe this is something we should look at because this person is 27 year old, 27 years old. This person's a teenager.
Myocarditis, all of that, like this is all just, I mean, anyone right now can look around and see what's happening.
So, the fact that is DHHS, are you at all forming any kind of committee or anything to look into this and to what's happening?
Is that on your radar?
Yeah, I follow record. My name is Joshua Chaola, CHIAH UI, CHA WLA. I'm the bureau chief of public health statistic informatic.
So, on the division of public health services, we do publish aggregate data on our data system.
Right now, the most current one, I believe is 2022.
We are waiting for the final confirmation from the most recent year data from those data portal, as well as the statistic reported that we relays based on the program needs.
We do focus on certain indicators. Just before this, this hearing, I have my staff to look into the most current that's certificate data to see if there is any vaccine causing adverse effect.
This tribal records using ICD-10 code. So, WHO does have ICD-10 code for COVID-19 vaccine, which is U12.9.
We look at that data, this code, excuse me, the ICD codes against the divide record data.
We found no record that has the, we found no record that, you know, related to those ICD-10 codes that we're looking to that related to the vaccine adverse effect.
So, we do look into different kind of a topic for the reporting purpose.
And I'm sorry, just, I just want to emphasize that this bill will amend the RSA 5C64A.
This is under division of vital records and administration, which is under the secretary of state.
So, New Hampshire is the only stated that the vital records statistic reporting system or vital records statistic data system not under health department in the nation.
So, to amend this part, we will need to work with the division of vital records and administration if the, if the bill is in act.
And I believe that the division of vital records and administration also submit a written testimony as far as we were told.
Representative Leon, and then Representative Webber, I think you're going to hear this, please.
I'm going to speak on a little bit.
Okay.
Can I ask one follow up question to representative resort and then ask my questions.
The first question was about the ICD-10 codes for the COVID vaccination.
Are those only for people who have been vaccinated in a doctor's office or would that also capture those who are going to a drugstore or some other location that's not a doctor's office for that administration.
The ICD-10 codes that I just mentioned is based on the birth certificate on the cause of death description and also the ICD code that transferred from the birth certificate.
So, this will be certified by the either medical examiner or their certifiers to fill out this form.
So, this part of information, I'm not in the best position to answer how this is a certified, how that certificate is a certified.
But the ICD-10 code is based on our search through all the ICD-10 mortality codes that are related or has vaccine as a key word.
We use that as our very roughly just have a fresh look and to search those codes in the vital record that certificate database.
And we found no records related to vaccine adverse efforts based on our current database that we have access to.
That's another follow up.
My next my my actual question that I was initially trying to ask.
I know that we've seen the VAERS data and there's been a lot of skepticism about the applicability of the VAERS data.
I'd like to know how you view self reported information such as the VAERS database as opposed to more population based record keeping how in Sweden we're able to look with.
They have a lot of information on their population and their health and there's a lot of population based data.
Would having this information including a recognition for those patients who have no IIS record and therefore it's not a zero entry.
It's a null entry.
Give us something that is more meaningful than VAERS even if we're not able to reach the sweetest registry model to look at look at case matched people and see if there is a signal of risk here in New Hampshire.
Or a signal of no risk quite frankly.
Practically this could be done.
However, we won't we are worried about the data limitation and data quality, particularly in our new Hampshire info immunization information system.
Excuse me.
Like Dr. Tenion address that NIH is is upping and self report voluntary system.
So some identifiers such as names and address.
We we don't validate that.
So in order to link back to our in order to link back to the vital record that certificate data, it probably won't have the one on one match.
It will be very fuzzy match.
In that sense to identify how many you know to make some connection between those two systems would be a little bit risky and the result may not be really meaningful in a statistic standpoint.
But we are happy to look into and maybe do some proof of concept.
However, this will have a further discussion later on.
So I recognize that there are some that are not going to be able to meet match to the registry.
If out of 100 deaths, 10, let's say only 25% of them had have valid entries with which to compare with the IIS in which you either have records of vaccination or no records of vaccination.
Is there value to be able to case match those individuals to look and see if there is either a signal of risk to the people of New Hampshire or to say that we have case match and we are not seeing any indication of higher mortality after these vaccinations and to start rebuilding
that trust that's so desperately needed.
Again, based on the data system quality and limitation, we don't recommend to do so.
Until we have really comprehensive IIS system established and data points are all validated, then we can perform that.
Right now, we can look into the vital records that certificate the data set and using the cause of that description and also ICD code to identify how many people, you know, certified with this were certified under this type of cause of death and produce that the result.
And in fact, divisional vital records, they do have never an HVRI and statistic reporting system query system available for all the public, you know, users to be able to query for the underlying cause of death.
That part does not really connect it to any IIS system or vaccine data, but to understand the overall cause of death, that would be the entry point for us to use as well.
I don't think I don't think I answer all your question and sorry if I missed part of the question.
However, maybe you can describe on the IIS limitation.
Yeah, if I may, you know, sharing an example of, you know, some of the limitations as we spoke to earlier, for example, with the IIS system.
There's no requirement to have say a legal name.
So someone named William could be in there as Bill or Susan is in there as Sue.
So it places a tremendous burden on the certifier of the death certificate to have to go through all the, you know, hundreds or thousands of records in IIS to ensure that the person they're associating an immunization record to matches someone's legal information that's contained in the death certificate.
I respectfully, I think you're overthinking that part, but I know that's your job. So thank you.
Representative Shapiro.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I might have this all wrong, but when the medical examiner is determining the cause of death and writing a report, do they do they take into consideration available medical records or interviews with families that might get some light on whether there's a correlation with a recent
examination?
Thank you for the question, but I don't believe we're in a position to speak for the office of the chief medical examiner and their processes.
Okay.
Thank you.
Other questions representative question.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for taking my question.
So even if we can't cross match every death certificate to every record in the VAERS.
I'm sorry, IIS.
We would still be able to, if there were a significant climb in a certain, say it was a cytokine storm was a cause of death that all of a sudden had increased fourfold in this system.
And then those, there might be people who aren't in the system, or who, or who you couldn't cross reference with.
But you'd still have the signal there with the data that you had.
Correct.
Yeah, radically. Yes. However, practically, you know, I as has some specific use and access restricted by the law.
So for myself, I don't have access to I as I have access to vital record because I'm the data steward.
But I don't have access to buy I as so in order for us to do so, like what Dr. Tennian address.
We will need to look into the statue on how who can access to both vital records and I as in order to do perform that kind of work.
But back to the data analysis and statistical.
One of the missions that the division of public health services has is really to provide meaningful data to the public.
We try to be transparent as much as possible without violating any privacy and protecting the confidentiality that is our mission and goal to provide this kind of meaningful data.
So, you know, if the data set is not really comparable or is not really has lots of limitation. We really don't want to perform that kind of analysis and deliver the reported that may not be validated.
Oh, so it sounds like the department admits that there are faults with the.
Their system and that it's not adequate to perhaps make determinations on these things.
And so it sounds like we could have an amendment to bolster our ability to surveil these things in New Hampshire with the department be willing to help us write an amendment to grant those permissions.
Yeah, so thank you for the question.
We would say that there's limitations with the various system.
You know, just as there are limitations here, we would be open to looking at any proposed amendments.
Senator McLean.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for taking my question. Sorry. I came in late. I was testifying on another bill, but just does the does the medical examiner who is writing up the death certificate.
I know that the IIS is an opt in, but do they have access to look at the IIS.
Thank you for the question. So currently the medical examiner does not have access to the IIS.
So at a minimum, I'm sorry, Mr. Quick follow up. So at a minimum, we would need to grant them access in order to go anywhere.
As we interpret the bill, it looks like we would have to grant anyone who can medically certify a death certificate access to the IIS. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for taking my question. For me, it looks like 22. So we have people who write the certificates.
They wonder why this occurred and then you use the code to look if something happened.
For example, last year, Dr Benjamin Chan, testified for the HHS that COVID-19 vaccines indeed cause increased myocarditis in certain geometry in certain populations.
So, but before that, like for a while, it was pushed on public. It pushed on medical examiners that vaccine related myocarditis is medical misinformation.
People were losing their licenses for even mentioning it. So of course, they were not putting those codes.
I see 10 codes because they didn't want to say that it cost for vaccine. I didn't know. They didn't know better what stops the heart of a young boy.
So you wouldn't look at that death because it's not on the court and the court wouldn't be there because they were said it's not happening.
So my understanding is that we need something like this bill, like to try to came out from this catch 22 situation. Could you comment?
I'm sorry. Could you actually state what the question was?
So, besides this enacting this bill, how we fix this situation when you only look in vaccine related deaths, if it's already listed as vaccine related deaths and don't investigate, for example, if boys are dying from myocarditis in 2021, nobody would put it as vaccine related death.
So you would never look into it. So how do we fix this situation?
Thank you for the question. But I think it goes back to a comment I had spoken to earlier.
The office of the chief medical examiner and those processes are separate from the department and the department isn't necessarily in a place to validate or verify the information that
persons who are certified or persons who are eligible to certify a death certificate place on there.
Other questions.
Okay, I think we're all set. Thank you. Thank you.
Also signed up to speak as Ben Bradley from the New Hampshire Hospital Association.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee. My name is Ben Bradley, Vice President State Government Relations for the New Hampshire Hospital Association, representing all the state's community hospitals and specialty hospitals in New Hampshire.
The hospital association is opposed to HB 1661 and has several concerns with the bill, which would require additional steps for providers to comply with RSA 5-C colon 64 medical certification of the death record.
This would include emergency room doctors, physician assistants, advanced practice registered nurses, and long term care providers among others who may certify death certificates, so not just the medical examiner or the state.
Current statute states, quote, the medical certification on the death record shall be completed by the attending physician APRN or physician assistant or certifying physician APRN or physician assistant and made available to the funeral
director next of kin or designated agent as soon as possible, but no later than 36 hours after the time of death.
We're concerned the language in HB 1661 would create delays to medical certification of death records given the requirements in this bill to include additional data elements from the New Hampshire Immunization Information System.
This bill would also require access to and training on the use of the NIH IIS, which is not currently afforded to all providers who may certify death certificates.
Additionally, providers would be responsible and likely liable for positively identifying a New Hampshire IIS participant is the same individual they are certifying in a death record.
This could be particularly challenging as the IIS does not include identifiers that would be needed to confirm the patient's identity.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide feedback on this bill.
We remain opposed and respectfully request the committee, the bill.
I'm happy to answer your questions.
Thank you. Any questions?
Seeing none.
Okay. Thank you.
Sorry.
It's probably this pink card.
Nobody brought the police.
Do you have any questions?
I don't know.
Okay.
Again, thank you, Mr. Bradley.
Before I close this public hearing, I have no one else signed up to testify on HB 1661.
I do want to just read those who signed in expressing support and opposition.
Let's see.
Nine people signed up to indicate support for this bill to sign up to oppose this bill.
That is those who were not going to be testifying today.
And I have the online.
Okay.
And what's the online?
And online, there were 155 in support and 37 against and one neutral.
Okay.
Having no one else signed up to speak today.